dzd:Algerian Dinars
usd:United States Dollars
ars:Argintinian Pesos
aud:Australian Dollars
ats:Austrian Schillings
bsd:Bahamian Dollars
bbd:Barbadian Dollars
bef:Belgian Francs
bmd:Bermudian Dollars
brl:Brazilian Reals
gbp:British Pounds
bgl:Bulgarian Leva
cad:Canadian Dollars
clp:Chilean Pesos
cny:Chinese Yan Renminbi
cyp:Cypriot Pounds
czk:Czech Koruny
dkk:Danish Kroner
xcd:East Caribbean Dollars
egp:Egyptian Pounds
eur:Euro
fjd:Fijian Dollars
fim:Finlandian Markkaa
frf:French Francs
dem:Deutsche Marks
xau:Gold Ounces
grd:Greek Drachmae
hkd:Hong Kong Dollars
huf:Hungarian Forint
isk:Icelandic Kronur
inr:Indian Rupees
idr:Indonesian Rupiahs
iep:Irish Pounds
ils:Israeli New Shekels
itl:Italian Lire
jmd:Jamaican Dollars
jpy:Nipponese Yen
jod:Jordanian Dinars
lbp:Lebanese Pounds
luf:Luxembourger Francs
myr:Malaysian Ringgits
mxn:Mexican Pesos
nzd:New Zealand Dollars
nok:Norse Kroner
nlg:Dutch Guilders
pkr:Pakistani Rupees
php:Philippino Pesos
xpt:Platinum Ounces
pln:Polish Zlotych
pte:Portuguese Escudos
rol:Romanian Lei
rur:Russian Rubles
sar:Saudi Riyals
xag:Silver Ounces
sgd:Singaporean Dollars
skk:Slovakian Koruny
zar:South African Rand
krw:South Korean Won
esp:Spanish Pesetas
xdr:IMF Special Drawing Rights
sdd:Sudanese Dinars
sek:Swedish Kronor
chf:Swiss Francs
twd:Taiwanese Dollars
thb:Thai Bhat
ttd:Trinidad and Tobago Dollars
trl:Turkish Liras
veb:Venezuelan Bolivares
zmk:Zambian Kwacha

